Clarify CellProfiler and CytoTable input guidance (#669)
cytomining/pycytominer: README.md

[![RTD](https://readthedocs.org/projects/pycytominer/badge/?version=latest&style=flat)](https://pycytominer.readthedocs.io/)
[![DOI](https://img.shields.io/badge/DOI-10.1038/s41592--025--02611--8-blue)](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-025-02611-8)

> Pycytominer is a suite of common functions used to process high dimensional readouts from high-throughput image-based profiling experiments.

Reviewer: While we're modifying this to be more accurate: Is Pycytominer _only_ functions? I think it's more. Maybe `toolkit` encapsulates this?
```suggestion
Pycytominer is a toolkit for processing high dimensional readouts from high-throughput image-based profiling experiments.
```

Image data flow from a microscope to cell segmentation and feature extraction tools (e.g. [CellProfiler](https://cellprofiler.org/) or [DeepProfiler](https://cytomining.github.io/DeepProfiler-handbook/docs/00-welcome.html)) (**Figure 1A**).
From here, additional single cell processing tools curate the single cell readouts into a form manageable for Pycytominer input.
For [CellProfiler](https://cellprofiler.org/), we recommend [CytoTable](https://github.com/cytomining/CytoTable) for harmonizing outputs before Pycytominer processing.

> Some legacy workflows use [cytominer-database](https://github.com/cytomining/cytominer-database), including the CSV collation utilities described below.

Reviewer: Consider making deprecation loud and clear.

```suggestion
Some legacy workflows use [cytominer-database ([DEPRECATED])](https://github.com/cytomining/cytominer-database), including the CSV collation utilities described below.
```

Pycytominer is primarily built on top of [pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/index.html), also using aspects of SQLAlchemy, sklearn, and pyarrow.

> Pycytominer currently supports [parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/), parquet dataset directories, compressed text (e.g. `.csv.gz`), and [`anndata`](https://github.com/scverse/anndata) (through the extra `pip install pycytominer[anndata]` and is limited to `h5ad` or `zarr`) input and output data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pycytominer currently supports [Apache Parquet](https://parquet.apache.org/), Parquet dataset directories, compressed text (e.g. `.csv.gz`), and [`anndata`](https://github.com/scverse/anndata) (through the extra `pip install pycytominer[anndata]` and is limited to `h5ad` or `zarr`) input and output data.
```

### CellProfiler inputs

Pycytominer supports data generated by [CellProfiler](https://cellprofiler.org/) and includes defaults that match common CellProfiler data structures and naming conventions.

> Pycytominer can process appropriately structured CellProfiler outputs directly, but for most workflows we recommend harmonizing CellProfiler outputs with [CytoTable](https://github.com/cytomining/CytoTable) before using Pycytominer: CellProfiler -> CytoTable -> Pycytominer.

Reviewer: Active language focus and avoiding "but".

```suggestion
Pycytominer can process appropriately structured CellProfiler outputs directly.
We recommend harmonizing CellProfiler outputs with [CytoTable](https://github.com/cytomining/CytoTable) before using Pycytominer for most workflows (e.g., CellProfiler -> CytoTable -> Pycytominer).
```

CellProfiler-generated image-based profiles typically consist of two main components:

- **Metadata features:** This section contains information about the experiment, such as plate ID, well position, incubation time, perturbation type, and other relevant experimental details. These feature names are prefixed with `Metadata_`, indicating that the data in these columns contain metadata information.
- **Morphology features:** These are the quantified morphological features prefixed with the default compartments (`Cells_`, `Cytoplasm_`, and `Nuclei_`). Pycytominer also supports non-default compartment names (e.g., `Mito_`).

### Harmonizing inputs from other image analysis tools

We recommend harmonizing data using [CytoTable](https://github.com/cytomining/CytoTable) when working with data from image analysis tools such as [CellProfiler](https://cellprofiler.org/) or [In Carta](https://www.moleculardevices.com/products/cellular-imaging-systems/high-content-analysis/in-carta-image-analysis-software), or legacy data systems such as cytominer-database.

> We built CytoTable to help prepare data for Pycytominer and includes many presets to help you get started with your work (please also check out our [CytoTable paper](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2026.101514)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We built CytoTable to help prepare data for Pycytominer and include many presets to help you get started with your work (please also check out our [CytoTable paper](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patter.2026.101514)).
```

> When parquet-backed CytoTable or CytoDataframe inputs include OME-Arrow image payload columns, Pycytominer still supports numeric `Image_*` measurements when you request image features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Parquet-backed CytoTable or CytoDataframe inputs include [OME-Arrow](https://github.com/WayScience/ome-arrow) image payload columns, Pycytominer still supports numeric `Image_*` measurements when you request image features.
```

  --operation median
```

> ### Pipeline orchestration

Reviewer: I'm happy-sad to see this go, mostly because I feel we should have a strong recommendation. In time, I think we should bring something like this back. Perhaps it's something in another repo; `awesome-cytomining-workflows` or a collection on [WorkflowHub](https://workflowhub.eu/) or something like that.

Reviewer 2: Agreed - it would be great to add back once these solutions are more mature (and/or receive dedicated maintenance)

We included some custom tools in `pycytominer/cyto_utils` that provides other functionality:

### CellProfiler CSV collation

If running your images on a cluster, unless you have a MySQL or similar large database set up then you will likely end up with lots of different folders from the different cluster runs (often one per well or one per site), each one containing an `Image.csv`, `Nuclei.csv`, etc.
In order to look at full plates, therefore, we first need to collate all of these CSVs into a single file (currently SQLite) per plate.
We can do this with a library called [cytominer-database](https://github.com/cytomining/cytominer-database).

> However, please use caution as cytominer-database is a deprecated tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, **please use caution** as cytominer-database is a deprecated tool.
```
